# Workflow & Interface

## AE Workflow

AE offers a flexible and customisable workspace. The main window of the program is called the "_application windox_". In this window, different panels are organised into a workspace. The default workspace contains groups and panels.

You can customise the workspace by draggin panels to a different location that better suits your workflow. Panels can be moved, removed from a group, plazced side by side, or automatically resize to fit within the window.

Each motion designer has their own way of working. After Effects makes it easy to set up a personalised workspace with the tools you use most and save it as a custom workspace. To switch workspaces or create a new one, go to _Window > Workspace_.

A panel often wontains more information that can fitt visually. with the shortcut (or ~on QWERTY), you can temporarily maek the panel under your mouse cursor fullscreen. Press it again to return.

There is a shortcut cheat sheet that youb can consult for all the frequently used shortcuts in the future.

## Importing Footage

A footage item is the basic unit in an AE project. You can import various types of footage items such as moving-image files, still-image files, still-image sequences, audio files, layered Photoshop or Illustrator files, and even other AE or Premiere Pro projects. There are several ways to import assets:

- cmd + I
- Drag & drop into the project panel
- Double-click the project panel
- File > import > file
- Right-click > import > file

You can import still images as individual footage items or as a sequence of images. This will become one footage item in your project. To load various images as a sequence, they must all be in the same folder and have a consistent numerical or alphabetical naming pattern.

You can also easily import Phoyoshop or Illustrator files. When importing these files, you get the option to import them as a single layer or each layer separately. You have different import options: fotage, composition, composition - retain layer sizes.

The number of assets and layers can quickly grow in an After Effects project. Therefore, ensure you have an organised layer structure in Photoshop or Illustrator when preparing your assets. Also, make sure that your canvas or artboard in AI/PS is the same size as your after effects project.

If you modify a layer in Photoshop or Illustrator, those changes will be automatically updated in After Affects. However, if you add a new layer after the file has been imported, you'll need to manually add it in After Affects.

### Footage

Imports the Photoshop file as a single layer. You have an option to merge all layers (Merged Layers) or select just a specific layer (Choose Layer).

### Composition

Creates a new composition with each layer of the Photoshop file as an individual layer within the composition. The size of each individual layer is the same as the size of the composition.

This can make it harder to animate since the anchor point of each layer is in the middle of the composition, regardless of where the content of the layer is located.

Editable Layer Styles transfer the layer effects from Photoshop to AE so you can animate them. Note: not all layer styles and effects can be transferred one-to-one from Photoshop to After Effects.

### Composition - Retain Layer Sizes

Similar to Composition, except the anchor point for each layer is in the moddle of the layer, not in the middle of the composition. The size (bounding box) of each layer matches the size of the content.

## Layers

Layers are the building blocks of a composition. Each item you add to a composition, such as an image, video file, or audio, becomes a new layer. Without layers, a composition would be an empty frame.

You can organise layers by moving them in the Timeline Panel or using the shortcut `cmd + opt + up/down`. Just like in Photoshop, a layer higher in the stack covers the layers below it. However, this isn't always the case, especially when working with masks or 3D layers. <br />
You can create new layers via _Layer > New > ..._

There are different types of layers:

- **Video- en audio layers**: Based on imported footage items like still images, videos, and audio tracks.
- **Special AE layers**: Such as cameras, lights, adjustment layers, and null objects, created within AE for specific functions.
- **Solid-color layers**: Based on solid-color footage items within AE.
- **Synthetic layers**: Contain visual elements generated by AE, like shape layers and text layers.
- **Precomposition layers**: Use a composition as a source for the layer (nesting).

Each layer has different properties, lany of which can be modified and animated. The basic properties that every layer has are found in the Transform Group. Most layer properties can be changed over time. Some, like Opacity, only change over time, while others, like Position, have spatial components that allow you to move or adjust the layer within the composition.

To view the properties of a layer, click the arrow next to the layer name to expand it. Most properties have a stopwatch icon, which lets you animate them, meaning you can change their value over time. You can quickly access key properties with shortcuts: P, T, S, R open the Position, Opacity, Scale, or Rotation properties of the selected layer.

## Rendering

Rendering your project can take anywhere from a few minutes to several hours, depending on the size of the composition, quality, complexity, and compression method. Follow these steps to add a composition to the render queue:

1. Check the work area of the composition.
2. Go to _Composition > Add to Adobe Media Encoder Queue_ or _Add to Render Queue_.
3. Click on the format of the composition to adjust the settings.
4. Close the settings window and start the render by clicking the green play button or the Render button in the Render Queue.

### Format

When rendering, we often use the H264 codec. The preset is set to "Custom" unless you've previously saved on your own preset. Another common codec is the Apple ProRes 422HQ codec. If you want no compression, choose Lossless.

### Output Name

This defines the name and location of the rendered file. Don't forget to check the box for audio if you have audio in you composition.

### Frame

Aspect Ration, the dimensions of the video. These usually match the composition settings. Use the specifications from you client's briefing or assignment.

### Frame Rate

The number of frames per second (fps). This should match the settings of you composition or source material.

### Field Order

Choose Progressive and avoid Interlaced, as the latter is rarely used anymore.

### Aspect

The pixel aspect ration of the video.

### Bitrate Settings

This determines the quality of the render. A value of 6 to 8 offers a good balance between quality, file size, and smooth playback.

## Compositions

All animations, layers, and effects are placed in a composition. An AE composition contains both a spatial (space) and temporal (time) dimension. Compositions typically contains one or more layers.

To create a new compositions, click the _New Composition_ icon in the project panel and manually enter all the settings, or drag a footage item into the icon. When you drag footage into the icon, AE will automatically create a new composition and match all the settings to those of the footage item.

You can manually enter composition settings or choose a preset that automatically fills in the frame size (idth and height), pixel aspect ration, frame rate, and many other settings.

At any point, you can adjust the composition settings by going to _Compositions > Compositions Settings_ or using the shortcut cmd + K.

### Composition Name

This is the name of the composition within your project. At Devine, we always use the name "\_main" for the main timeline. This ensures it always appears at the top of the Project Panel.

### Preset

After Effects offers many pre-set composition templates, but we create out own presets.

### Width / Height

These are the spatial dimensions of the composition, meaning how wide and tall it is.

### Pixel Aspect Ratio

Most digital imagine systems use a grid of square pixels. However, some systems, such as those compatible with standard-definition televisions, use rectangle pixels. Pixel aspect ration describes this difference.

### Duration

This defines the duration of the composition.

### Background Color

The background color of the composition does not affect the final render. This color is only visible in After Effects and can be toggled on or off in the Composition Panel.

When you add a footage item to a composition, it becomes the source for a new layer in the composition. A composition can contain multiple layers, and even other compositions, which is called nesting.

## Precomposing & Nesting

If you want to group multiple layers in a composition, you can precompose them. This places the selected layers into a new compositions, which then replaces the original layers in the initial composition. The new, nested composition will appear in the Project Panel and can be reused throughout your project. You can nest compositions by placing an existing composition into another on, just like importing any other asset into a composition.

Precomposing and nesting are useful techniques to keep complex compositions organised. They offer the folowwing benefits:

- **Reuse**: You can create an animation in on composition and reuse it multiple times in your project.
- **Quick adjustments**: If you change something in a nested composition, the changes are automatically applied everywhere that composition is used.
- **Additional transformation properties**: The nested composition layer has its own trasnformation properties, on top of those inside the precomposition.

To precompose a layer or group of layers, use **Layer > Pre-compose** or the shortcut cmd + shift + C. When precomposing, you jave two options:

- **Leave all Attributes in**: Keeps all properties and keyframes of the precomposition layer in the original composition, applied to the new composition layer. The new composition will match the size of the selected layer. This option isn't available if you select multiple layers, text layers, or shape layers.

- **Move all Attributes into the new composition**: Moves all properties and keyframes of teh composed layers into the new composition. The layer properties remain intact inside the precomposition. The size of the new composition remains the same as the original and does not adjust to the content.

**Crop Comp to Region of Interest**: This feature allows you to crop the dimensions of a precomposition based on a specific region. This is useful when you want to adjust the size to fit the (animated) assets. To do this, first select a Region of Interest (found at the bottom of the Composition Panel), and then choose *Composition > Crop Comp to Region of Interest*.

## Keep things organised

An efficient workflow starts with good project management. Tru to integrate these three stops into your personal workflow:

### 1. Gather information

These questions help you get a clear picture of the project and determine how to proceed:

- What is the goal of the project? For example, a promotional video or an explainer.
- Where will th animation be used? Think about social media, websites, or TV.
- What is the key message? What must be communicated clearly?

These questions will also help you define the technical specifications, such as video length, aspect ration, frame rate, codec, etc.

### 2. Prepare the artwork

It's rare for design files to be immediately already for animation. Usually, some preparation is neede, such as splitting artwork into layers or designing additional elements. By properly prepareing this step, importing assets into After Effects will be smoother. It's better to take time organising your files than wasting time fixing issues later in After Effects.

### 3. Structure Your Project File

This is crucial, especially if you're working in a team and colleagues need to work with your files. do this not just for them, but for yourself as well. A well-organised project file brings peace of mine and helps you navigate a complex structure faster. Use clear naming conventions and a logical folder structure.

In After Effects, you can start a new project based on an existing project file. You do this in the After Effects settings, where you can select the providing file as a starting point.

`After Effects > Settings > New Project`: This folder strcuture is present in the keepthingsorganised.aep file. This is just an example; you can choose how to structure your projects by creating a new arrangement that suits your workflow.